Kate Folkenroth- 12.6

### Introduction
All over the world, information and communication is becoming more digitized. There is still a need for traditional disseminations of information such as posters and displays, however the rise of technology has only continued to play a larger role in our day to day discourse. At the forefront of the scholarly approach to this is the field of digital humanities. According to Digital Humanities Quarterly, an open-access peer-reviewed digital journal, "Digital humanities is a diverse and still emerging field that encompasses the practice of humanities research in and through information technology, and the exploration of how the humanities may evolve through their engagement with technology, media, and computational methods" (2021). This is one of many definitions created to describe digital humanities as a field of study. Common in many definitions is the highlight of the use of technology to communicate information gathered from the methods of the humanities. Most importantly, for the conceptualization of projects in the realm of digital humanities, is the respect of it being a newer interdisciplinary and only partially charted frontier.
A specialization within the field of digital humanities is on curation. Analog curation is the traditional method before the use of digital technologies to catalog, archive, and preserve objects, items, or other works. This is seen as the placards and common physical displays in museums but also seen as archives and libraries with labels on the objects stored and protected in collections. Digital curation is then seen as a similar process but with digital data, information, storage, and display. Digital humanities plays the important role of providing an interdisciplinary framework for collaboration in this process while digital curation acts as a tool for long-term preservation and access to necessary resources (Sabharwal, 2015, p. 12). This relationship allows for innovative work as these practices of curation are documented, combined and improved upon. The combination of analog and digital curation is now often referred to as hybrid curation. 
Digital Humanities is also known as being project-based and a field of practice. These concepts from the field need to be applied to a project to be demonstrated and analyzed. For this, I am applying the concept of hybrid curation to an item gifted to Allegheny College: an Indonesian bis pole sculpture. This object is a tall cylindrical wood carving featuring white pigments from Indonesian created post-1981 (Bocchi, n.d.). This resembles the art and wood carving style of the Asmat ritual bis poles. These were traditionally used in their cultural death rituals with important ties to Asmat religious practices (Deboratz, 2008). Since this piece does not feature some key characteristics of bis poles and is large yet without signs of external display, this piece has been determined to be an "art-for-export" work likely purchased in Jakarta in the early 1990s. The information already gathered has allowed for the beginning conceptualization of this project. However, more research will need to be completed to create a display for the object on Allegheny's campus. 

### Topic & Keywords
The main topic of this project is on the ethics and application of hybrid curation on physical objects.
The keywords are separated into the categories of hybrid archival workflow, ethical curation, and Indonesian bis pole related terminology. Due to the nature of combining curation processes, words like analog and digital curation were still necessary to use along with hybrid curation or exhibition as the terminology is not yet standardized. The activity based terminology needed to be paired with adjectives such as ethically or culturally appropriate to redirect the search towards publications focused on writing about the process and not just that it was used. This brought me to the need for digital humanities as this was the question paired with the action and presentation of the respective object. As I continue my research, I will be using digital humanities as part of my keywords. 
Due to the object that I am working with for this project, I also needed to have a specific focus on its context and culture. This led to the focus around terms including Indonesia, Asmat culture, or Asmat people along with woodcarving, bis poles, or exports. Since the object is also an art export, I chose to focus on art curation and art terminology in respect to the bis pole. 

### Literature Review
Before being able to create an exhibit for an object outside of its original cultural context, it is important to under the methodology I plan to use. This field is new and just beginning to be properly documented, analyzed, and reflected upon. The practice of hybrid curation is the combination of traditional and digital ways of cataloging, processing, and preserving information. This is ideal for the exhibit created by this project as it engages skills that can be used in larger contexts of communication and education especially applied to the dissemination of information. When looking at the literature available, I wanted to find the main ethical considerations in using hybrid curation for displaying an object outside of its original context. 
One of the common themes across the articles I found was the importance of the interdisciplinary nature of the work. When put into practice in a study with students creating digital exhibits for a graduate course, Sheffer and Hunker break down the pedagogy of using curation to learn. One of their main findings was that collaboration and taking "an interdisciplinary, wide angle view on their subject" was key to curating exhibits (Sheffer & Hunker, 2019). This is helpful in knowing the necessity to bring multiple perspectives to the table. The process is naturally aligned to make curation a social activity and not become myoptic. The varying disciplines are also bringing varying practices that can create innovative standards to improve the ethical discussion. However, as a result, there is no set practices in this work to follow or review projects for ethicality. Thus when using curation in classrooms as a part of pedagogy the social responsibility has not been documented and addressing the new work that is being completed.
Curation is meant to be a form of long-term preservation which also implies reuse and access. Some argue that qualitative data cannot be reused past the original researcher due to missing contextualization. In a piece for The Qualitative Report, Karcher et al. introduces an epistemic approach to curation allowing for responsible reuse (2021). Through attached context, a sense of what is missing, and reflecting the researchers in the data, the authors suggest that qualitative data can be reused. Ethically, they reflect that with special considerations on data management and in the planning process, the data can be relevant and used long after its collection. This is applied to digital humanities as this field tries to use approaches like this to present data, qualitative and otherwise, to be used and reused.
	As this is a long-term preservation, there is more focus on the quality of the archive. In many cases, the work is done once and then reused with minimal question of the origination. As Forkosh Baruch and Godot explain, "The curation process produces snippets of knowledge that are connected into meaningful content, thereby examining a topic from diverse perspectives, using various resources" (2020). If curators are the ones deciding what is meaningful and even creates different means by piecing together information, it is important to recognize the social responsibility that is held by those functioning in these positions. This circles back to the discussions of how curators assure that they are ethically assembling collections.
	A potential solution urged by Christen and Anderson is a change in paradigm with the concept of "slow archives"(2019). Slow, in this respect, is not in opposition to fast but rather about prioritizing the process. They call for the decolonization of curation and push forward "an ethics of care, built collaboratively and from relations of respect" (Christen & Anderson, 2019). Highlighting the crucial social, multi-perspective part of the curation work only reinforces the first point of interdisciplinary curation but also labels the need for a space of reflection on process, products, and ethics. 
After parsing out some of these ethical themes from the literature, it will be important to look at these factors of hybrid curation in the lens of digital humanities and as a methodology and workflow to be used. This project will require a more in-depth literature review with these considerations and likely more in mind. Many of the pieces found in this preliminary literature review will also act as "seed articles" for future source mining.
With these pieces, I plan to work to answer how the methods of ethical hybrid curation can be applied to the item donated to Allegheny College. This will mainly be how the application process looks. This will have differences between the analog, placards, and the digital, website, portions of the exhibit. How do these approaches differ in the conversation of ethics. I also plan to have each of the exhibits able to be viewed separately while also able to be viewed together to develop more meaning. These questions will guide me through this project.

### Research Question
    How can methods of ethical hybrid curation described in the literature be applied to an item gifted to the College?

### Project Aims
My project's primary goal is to create an educational and culturally appropriate hybrid exhibit for the Indonesian bis pole installation. This will be accomplished by completing several smaller steps before achieving this goal.
First, I hope to attain a better understanding of the collaboration between analog and digital curation that is seen in hybrid exhibitions. Second, I hope to create a framework of archival workflow focused on ethical displays in a public space for educational purposes. Lastly, I plan to apply these to the creation of the hybrid exhibit of the bis pole.
With the completion of these pieces, this project will catalog this artifact while creating an accessible digital archive and analog exhibit. This work would serve as a model for future curation on campus.

### Expected Final Product
The final product of this project will be seen in three parts: a literature review, an exhibition, and a final reflective composition. The literature review will be on the methodology of hybrid curation. This literature will then be applied as the methodology is used to create a hybrid exhibit of the Indonesian bis pole gifted to Allegheny College. Lastly, the final composition will surmise the process and application while reflecting on the implications of this work in the field of Global Health. Due to the nature of this project, the analog exhibition will be displayed publicly on the campus of Allegheny College in Meadville, Pennsylvania. The digital display of this exhibit will be featured through Allegheny Web services and may be accessed publicly through the internet or through the QR codes that are posted on placards in the physical exhibition. 

### Methods
For each part of my final product, slightly different methods will be engaged to achieve my proposed aims. The project will begin with a literature review. The second portion will utilize the knowledge gained from the literature review to enact a methodology of hybrid curation. The final reflective composition will detail the process of using these methods.
My primary literature review will focus on the current practices of hybrid curation. I will be using the Peltier Library AggreGator Web services and the subsequent databases utilized through this program. Through introductory findings, I have found that one database has not been sufficient to cover the interdisciplinary and novelty of the subject I am studying. The terminology in the curation speciality of digital humanities has been constantly changing with each scholarly published piece in the last year. This discipline has increased in popularity, and just recently, came onto the global stage. With this in mind, I have discovered that this work relies heavily on "seed articles" which allow me to enter the specific vein of digital humanities focused on curation practices. Currently, I am using the keywords "ethical hybrid curation OR display OR digital curation."  For further investigation, I plan to use "digital humanities hybrid curation OR exhibition" as well as source mining the relevant works I have already collected. Filters selected for these searches have been scholarly & peer-reviewed, journal articles, books/eBooks, and published in the last 5 years. When screening for relevant pieces, I remove all that reflect biology or chemistry subjects such as "genomic curation".
I will also have a small literature review completed with the help of other scholars to organize the information that will be presented in the exhibit. This process relies on using the same databases due to the lack of specific locations for this subject of the bispole in scholarly literature. Since this work has already been started, I will focus on recent publications that have been added to the discourse on Indonesian and Asmat wood carving. I am using the keywords "art curation AND Asmat AND bis pole OR wood carving" with scholarly and peer-reviewed publications in the last 10 years. I have also been on a specific search for museum exhibitions on the Asmat culture and wood carving or that feature bispoles. This has required a search in the database World Cat with the keywords "Asmat exhibition OR bispole exhibition" to surmise the exhibits. 
After completing these literature reviews, I will take these findings and apply them into the creation of a display for the installation of bis pole sculpture. The curation methodology, within the digital humanities lens, is broken down into three levels. According to Arjun Sabharwal in his chapter defining digital curation, "... one level [is] for working with the digital files and the technology to preserve them, another one to exercise intellectual control, and a third one for scholarly processing" (2015, p. 17). This concept of levels is important to keep in mind as I manage the scale and scope of this project. I will be utilizing the work done by others as the source of the information I will be using for the display, not creating this portion by myself. This will also be assisted by faculty members representing their respective departments and specialities to complete important considerations of this project. Topics such as the culture and society in Southeast Asia and Pacific, art history and curation, and assistance with digital humanities work will be shared work.
I will be directing my focus onto specific pieces of the curation workflow as it is not a finite process. The workflow is not specified in documents but digital curation has worked to define a "lifecycle" of data. Within the digital content lifecycle, Sabharwal compares these activities in two groups as "...for instance, conceptualization, appraisal, selection, access, and preservation…" from "...creating, ingesting, storing, disposing (or migrating), and transforming"  (2015, p. 17). My project will focus on the conceptualization, access, creating, and transforming of the information around the bispole. With faculty assistance, we can discuss selection, preservation, and storing. My project will also bring ethical concepts into conversation with all these responsibilities. 

After completing the curation and display, the project will require proper documentation and reflection. The documentation from the process of creating the exhibits will likely be in the form of informal notes during actual creation. I will, first, need to complete a proper composition of the archival workflow I completed and describe the completed project. Lastly, I will take all of the work from literature review and the creation of the exhibits to complete a reflection in terms of the Global Health Studies dimensions. This should be a comprehensive reflection of all of the notes I made throughout the work of this project and look at the larger contexts I have started to consider.

### Global Health Context

Global Health Studies is an interdisciplinary field that can be split into four distinct dimensions: science and the environment, power and economics, ethics and social responsibility, and culture and society. In the reflection of my project, there are two foci as I contextualize my work into the field of Global Health. First, I focus on both the history and narrative around the object I am curating, the bis pole. Second, I highlight the implications of the hybrid curation methodology in these dimensions.

*Indonesian bis pole*
Focused on the ecological and built environment, I will be focused on the materials of the bis pole and their interaction with human health. The wood used in this object is likely Ironwood which has important ties to the economy. The physical properties of the wood allowed for the pigments to not seep into the wood itself. The colors also displayed on the piece were created by the use of white clam shells or clay. These pigments are able to stay on the bis pole without adhesion. The creation of these exports had an effect on the environment and the people themselves. Part of my exhibit will feature details on these materials and their effects on the population interacting with them.
An important feature of this object is that it is an export. This bis pole was created for the purpose of being sold. Being an art-for-export piece also brings to rise the concepts of tourism and resource allocation. This object was made  from materials that were not all from one region and furthermore used materials like ironwood that could have been used for other purposes. The economics of the region where this resource was originally made may shed light on the condition and lifestyles of the people in the region. The demographics and job market may also be an important factor of why these pieces were being made for export.
Lastly, this bis pole is from a specific culture, the Asmat culture and its people. This cultural context is important as I look into who created this object and why. bis poles in the Asmat culture have a long history of being part of tribal death rituals and were used for specific purposes. These people and their culture are represented by this object. This in the larger context brings questions related to material culture and what practices, beliefs, and values we can derive from this piece. Stigmatizations and judgements are often formed from outside the originating community which can be instigated by improper displays of objects outside their original context.

*Hybrid Curation*
With the lens of digital humanities, I will be working mostly with the science seen in the field of computer science. I will be working with architecture code and software to create a website as the digital footprint for the Indonesian bis pole display. This will feature many concepts of web development to create a structure that is ADA compliant and easily replicable. Looking at larger contexts, this framework can be repeated and applied to many different objects at Allegheny. Further past the focus of curation, this use of a hybrid approach for disseminating information can add to the conversation in health communication. The pairing of computer science skills with the work in Global Health and traditional analog methods can allow for innovative approaches to broadcast information for an audience potentially larger than previously fathomable.	

Another concept central to this project is power relations in the creation of exhibits. Curation and displays of objects can be made for the preservation of culture but are not often made by representatives of the culture. It is vital to recognize the positionality of the creator of the display as well as who is featured, able to speak, or considered an expert. These concepts of power are dynamic and not always clear of who may be ignored and left out of the narrative created by the exhibits. Thinking outside of curation, these power relations are important to recognize in the misrepresentation and treatment of others. These lack of acknowledgements often degrade the healthcare of those from minorities as the majority overtakes the health narrative. Diverse representations allow for knowledge circulation that can improve the equity of treatment and policies.
	Lastly, this exhibit is proposed to be ethical. An ethical display is difficult to navigate with many questions that need to be asked recursively. Such questions include "What data/information should be collected, presented, stored, or preserved?", "Is there more value being placed on certain voices over others?", "How and where should objects be displayed or should they be returned?" These questions are important as items and information is traded globally. The harm of unethical displays can be seen in the consequences of stigmatization, emotional and mental health degradation, lawsuits, or protests. 

### Proposed Timeline

// Refer to orignial Google Doc for table

### Budget

The estimated budget of this project is $150 as it is necessary for the exhibition portion of this work. The texts I am using for my literature review are free and publicly available or accessed through the Allegheny library services. The digital space and software are already available under the existing Allegheny digital infrastructure. The piece will need to be properly displayed, in a currently undetermined location, in efforts to preserve the materials and color of the bis pole along with proper installation costs which will not be addressed in this budget. For the budget requested, the entirety will be used for creating appropriate placards for the exhibit of the bis pole. This is divided between the material that would allow for appropriate mounting, ensure durability of the display, and demonstrate continuity with existing placards across campus.


#### References

- Bocchi, M. A. (n.d.). MF Art Gift 2019. Unpublished, typescript. 

- Christen, K., & Anderson, J. (2019). Toward slow archives. Archival Science, 19(2), 87-116. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10502-019-09307-x

- Digital Humanities Quarterly. (2021). About DHQ. Digital Humanities Quarterly.   http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/about/about.html

- Forkosh Baruch, A., & Gadot, R. (2021). Social Curation Experience: Towards Authentic Learning in Preservice Teacher Training. Tech Know Learn 26, 105–122. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10758-020-09449-3

- Karcher, S., Kirilova, D., Pagé, C., & Weber, N. (2021). How data curation enables epistemically responsible reuse of qualitative data. The Qualitative Report, 26(6), 1996-2010. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.46743/2160-3715/2021.5012

- Post, C., & Chassanoff, A. (2021) Beyond the workflow: archivists’ aspirations for digital curation practices. Arch Sci 21: 413–432. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10502-021-09365-0

- Sabharwal, A. (2015). Defining digital curation in the digital humanities context. In Digital Curation in the Digital Humanities: Preserving and Promoting Archival and Special Collections (pp. 11-25). Elsevier Science & Technology. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-100143-1.00001-5

- Sheffer, J. A., & Hunker, S. D. (2019). Digital Curation: Pedagogy in the Archives. Pedagogy 19(1): 79-105.https://www.muse.jhu.edu/article/712787

