# Chapter 1. 

Archives are an interesting type of data structure with an intricate system known as the curation through archival workflow. Archives often feature primary sources of information that curators have made accessible by linking and adding important metadata, other primary, and secondary sources to contextualize. To increase accessibility, archives have now been seen digitized online. While digital curation as practice has been seen in various forms for half a century, this specific process still lacks clear standards and best practices. Various locations and mediums of archived items are archived with only their own respective needs of accessibility in mind. Without universal standards to follow, there is more potential for improper curation and the consequences that come with this. Curators and scholars must rely on recent publications and projects to understand this depth of digital practice. By reflecting on published methods and workflows, common themes and shared definitions can be noted. As I gathered information for this project, I split my time equally between recently published articles and published archives with their documentation. 

## Literature Review

Focusing on language and scholarly reflections on digital curation, I used Allegheny College's Pelletier AggreGator to conduct a literature review. This database was appropriate to reflect the interdisciplinary needs of my search. The keywords entered were "long term data preservation AND hybrid curation AND digital humanities AND (informatics OR anthropology)" to reach the desired articles that featured ethics, anthropology, and computer science discourse. These keywords also allowed for articles that addressed how digital practices interact with analog or other traditional practices. While this project is solely focused on the digital curation and potential exhibition of items, it is impossible to have pure digital curation without some discussion of the physical objects or the digitization of them. Finally, the filter of "scholarly and peer-reviewed" and limitation to publications from the last ten years narrowed the search to 74 articles that were parsed through to conduct this literature review. With these available sources, I determined the distinguishing characteristics of digital curation from the perspective of digital humanists to capture the complex interdisciplinary conversation.

### Digital Curation as a Practice & a Discipline

Though I have already briefly introduced a simple definition of methodology of digital curation, it is important to note that it is also a discipline. Only in the last ten years has there been a specific exploration of digital curation in its own right. From its origin as part of other disciplines, digital curation had grown into what Dr. Sarah Higgins deems a "sub-meta-discipline" which has created interesting dynamics with other disciplines as it "transcends and influences all of [the information science] disciplines and sub-discipline" (Higgins, 2018, pp. 1332). This origin of digital curation is important to note as it shapes the terminology used in discipline. The terminology is brought from other disciplines and now holds similar but often new meaning. Obscurity from this conglomeration has required scholars to clarify and define their usage of terms alongside many projects and works. 

This complexity of clarity is reiterated by Dr. Rebecca Grant in her paper about research data management (2017). She explains how there is a severe lack of distinction between digital curation, data curation, and research data management to such an extent that in published discussions on practices, digital collections may include analog material. This reflects the same difficulty I found in this information gathering process as many of these pieces do not always distinguish their use of digital curation from other curatorial practices. Beyond not distinguishing between analog and digital, there is an explicit collision of understanding what curators do. From the disciplinary perspective of library and information science, this practice of curation is seen within the many associated roles and skills in data science (Virkus & Garoufallou, 2019). In the nine roles presented, three roles completely overlap the discussion of what curation is in the digital humanities. These roles are the data manager, data librarian, and data steward or curator. This significant difference and parsing of roles in data science demonstrates inability to be restrictive on the terminology of what digital curation is in publications. Many archives may not be labeling their work and job titles as any of these labels. More importantly, the labels that are chosen are highly representative of their curators original disciplinary background.

Today, scholars are acknowledging that digital curation has now become its own mature disciple that overarches information science (Higgins, 2018). However, it is not a field. A field recognizes people coming from multiple backgrounds and disciplines to conduct cross-, multi-, or inter- disciplinary work. This distinction reflects the new trend that people are receiving training directly as digital curators. Curation has developed into having its own epistemology and professionalization, having its own journals and conferences. Digital curation is still recognized as a methodology and practice but also now its own discipline.

### Use, Reuse, & Sharing

As the discipline of digital curation continues to be refined, the methodology and theories are also still being developed for curation. The breadth of this umbrella term has even stated that digital curation is all of the user's interactions with the structure of the digital archive (Davis, 2017). This places digital curation under the theory of attention– that it matters how people allocate, acquire and control the information. This is important to consider as digital curation should have the user experience at the forefront of their work and consider how their structure works to deliver the information. 

The literature focused mainly on the concepts of use, reuse, and sharing of data. Improvements to other aspects of user experience are constantly being suggested that can be implemented into documented workflows, but these three highlight the main purpose of curation. Dr. Tarvo Kärberg highlights the use of pre-ingest activities, any work that occurs while acquiring the item, to improve the outcomes of curation (2013). These activities, in whatever form they manifest as, work to build better metadata records for the item and attempt to prevent larger issues that may occur in the middle of the process of archiving an item. With this intentional collection work being completed ahead of time, the curation work conducted following these activities is also likely to be of higher quality. His work also showed how it is possible to reuse other metadata systems to improve the quality of archive descriptions. Reuse of metadata is a sign that standards can be achieved even if they are dynamic to adjust for improvements.

 Focused on sharing data, it has been noted that improved curation of research facilitates more collaboration. As Sheila Anderson and Dr. Tobias Blanke followed the digital evolution of science disciplines and now the humanities, they iterated the importance of sharing and collaboration. They compared the definitions of e-Science and "At their core is the idea of collaboration and sharing between and across communities – whether sharing research data, compute power or other resources– in order to enable new forms of enquiry, and the generation and understanding of new research questions'' (Anderson & Blanke, 2012). Using the ability and power of digital connection and collaboration started the need for better standards of documentation and context. This identification of collaborative work in e-Science was seen again in all of the examples such as anthropologists and computer scientists collaborating to complete new digital humanities projects. The digital humanities inquiry in itself is based on the collaboration model (Maryl et al., 2020). Beyond just digitizing and sharing, curation became the method to share data at a better standard. Using collaborative curation practices was seen as a solution to the epistemological difficulties of reusing qualitative data (Karcher et al., 2021). This collaboration, along with data management practices and technological advances, allow for more context and ensure ethical sharing of information so that it may be possible to reuse this qualitative information. 

 In 2013, Dr. Alex Poole discussed this future of sharing as well while also reinforcing the need for collaboration and cooperation. This is what Poole cites as the key to the long-term sustainability of information. This sustainability allows for longer periods of time to reuse information for its intended purpose. This sustainability is echoed by Dr. Colin Post and Dr. Alexandra Chassanoff. They highlight that keeping tensions between local and professional contexts at the forefront of curation work is necessary for sustaining archival infrastructure long-term (2021). This reflects the need for both trained standardized practices for curation but also allowing for flexibility with the needs of local contexts. Without multidisciplinary collaboration, the quality of curated products is questionable and not sustainable.

 Along with improving the quality of the data that is available, the quality of the display and the usability of the information structure are also of note. Often hybrid approaches are cited (McCarthy et al., 2015) as the best way to increase usability in information architecture. By merging analog and digital ways to access the information, a larger audience has more access to information available. These ideas of quality and access are essential to the curators' job. This will be more important to consider for the future of items in collections rather than just transferring archives completely into a digital state. 

### Meaning & Intermediation

While there are many labels and descriptions of curators' jobs, the most important part identified in the literature is the job of adding meaning to information through selection and organization. When implementing curation in the classroom, Dr. Jolie Sheffer and Stefanie Hunker wanted to show how knowledge of a subject is shaped by particular contexts and framing by having students create projects of their own using curation techniques (2019). They found that their students had firsthand experience of connecting sources together for new interpretations and innovative displays for their exhibits. This selection and organization practice allowed for a demonstration of this meaning-making process. Dr. Alona Forkosh Baruch and Dr. Rivka Gadot also looked at curator's role in education as they attempted to characterize the curation activity of teachers. As they were describing what curation is, they wrote "The curation process produces snippets of knowledge that are connected into meaningful content, thereby examining a topic from diverse perspectives, using various resources" (Forkosh Baruch & Gadot, 2021). This connection that they describe as the added value from curation, which is echoed throughout the literature, makes it worthy of its own discipline and discourse. Some have been going as far as to ask for curatorial work to be held with the same value as text-heavy publications of conventional scholars (Siddiqui, 2015). This is an important acknowledgment of curation's value that even though the material is not the curators' original research, the organization is just as important. It also suggests the possibility of this work not requiring explicit expertise in the subject, rather encouraging collaboration and reflexivity more than any other factors. 

This ability to add meaning highlights the core concept of intermediation. This ability to add also allows for the ability to change or remove meaning or context from archived pieces. Curators act as mediators for the public and its history, working between the audience and the items. There is a strong argument for disintermediation (Sabharwal, 2017) where the public is in charge of its own memory and history. This lack of intervention also aligns with the discussion that data is a commodity that should be free and open access for anyone to look at and interpret meaning on their own (Mauthner & Parry, 2013). Many issues arise with this approach to data. As structural violence affects the ability of communities to work with data as there is a significant inequity in access and education to understand raw data. This undermines the original purposes of increasing accessibility, use, reuse, and sharing. 

Collaboration functions as an important way to improve use, reuse, and sharing while also reducing the negative effects of intermediation. Dr. Natasha Mauthner and Odette Parry focus on the policies that help facilitate researchers to curate their work (2013). They found that some of the most successful attempts to facilitate archives were due to the collaboration of the researcher and some entity that specializes in curation, like another organization, team, or single curator. By working together, this process happens more often and more ethically. 

Along with the push for collaboration, this has brought forward the potential solution of slow archives (Christen & Anderson, 2019) for more ethically created archives. These archives aren't slow in the sense of temporality but rather done with the intention to be ethically created with a focus on quality rather than quantity or rapidness. This push is for curators to work with the public to create the archive and have a recursive archival workflow to start working towards reducing the impacts of intermediation. This has especially been seen among indigenous peoples working with curators to preserve their information. Highlighted from these collaborations, the concept of knowledge organization is worthy to note as it distinguishes curation from other methods. Knowledge organization can reinforce semantic frameworks (Sabharwal, 2021) through metadata. For example, this can promote English over the original language of information as the metadata is often standardized in the curators' language which sustains the hierarchies of collection. This has led to solutions like parallel metadata and other innovative approaches. These issues that arise from adding meaning through information organization are crucial to note as future practices should continue to work towards more ethical practices.

### Evaluating Archives

  After the completion of curation work, one difficulty derived from the nature of the work is how to measure its success. While other fields may have more obvious ways to measure success, curation lacks specific standards to judge this abstract concept of success. Abrams attempts to capture this in four categories for evaluating the success of digital preservation (2021). These four categories are accessibility, integrity, authenticity, and usability. This unsurprisingly reflects many of the distinguishing factors of digital curation that have been common in the literature. Accessibility and usability are integral to user experience. //add about these first two/. Accessibility and usability reflect the use, reuse, and sharing of the work. Integrity and authenticity are crucial in attempts to prove ethical intermediation. These ideas highlight the responsibilities of the curator(s) to be transparent and construct a trustworthy workflow. This transparency can also help reduce various future replication crises (Slingerland et al., 2020) that may occur in many fields. Integrating transparency by documenting an archival workflow can improve the reproducibility and sustainability of archives. // don't just end it here/

<==main writing point======================>

// lil conclusion?  /The novelty of the discipline reinforces our need to rely on the umbrella definition of digital curators: those who collect, organize, and then disseminate information to users digitally. //For this project, I will be working with the practice and methodologies rather than the discipline. //

## Scoping Review

This literature cannot stand alone to envision the entirety of what must be considered when conducting digital curation. Current practices must also be considered as published is often retrospective and often does always reflect details on technical, ethical, and general humanities considerations. This can be conducted with scoping review modified information architecture analysis of published archives. These were chosen from the articles selected for the literature review. The analysis is modified to reflect the findings from the literature review highlighting the accessibility, integrity, authenticity, and usability. Technical practicality was also taken note of such as file types, data structure, and metadata standards which were not often featured in the reviewed literature.

