# Introduction. 
We live in the information era, denoted by the shift from traditional industry to new information technology. Along with this shift is the new reality of computerization and digitized aspects of life. The combination of the two has allowed for unfathomable amounts of data preserved, stored, accessed, processed, visualized, and displayed from all over the world. While these facts are great achievements of society, these do not reflect the unanticipated consequences. Unfathomable storage and preservation require systems to allow any of this data to be found or used. Today, we are confronted with the tension of this abundance of information and a scarcity of what is being used.

Developments in technology have attempted to close this gap. Research is constantly being conducted on generating better models, search engines, and visualizations. All of this research is based on the needs of attaching context to these seemingly arbitrary data. Processes such as indexing and cataloging create both human readable information and machine actionable knowledge so that computer based information systems can function. These systems at their core require some form of intervention by humans. Curation is the process of collecting, selecting, organizing, storing, and displaying items with their respective information. Digital curation does this with digital content, storage, displays and thus acting as a tool for the long-term preservation and access to the necessary resources (Sabharwal, 2015, p. 12). Curation, regardless of medium, is the entire process including smaller practices like indexing, cataloging, and digitization. This allows for practice of curation is an effective way to create data structures and systems like archives.

While many assume objectivity in the creation of technological systems, according to Kranzberg's first law "Technology is neither good nor bad, nor is it neutral" (//the kranzberg og writing/). These systems are reflective of the beliefs, positionalities, and cultures of people who created them.  //say more about non neutrality {1-2}, bridge to social/  This reinforces the idea that data is not just a technical process, but a social one as well (Johnson, 2016). //say more to finish the importance of data as a social thing and human thing {2-3} / 

Technology, even though it has become more pervasive and available in the world, is still not experienced equally. There are still barriers such as access, awareness, and education to interact, change, and improve these systems. Where there is inequality, there is a call for justice. // preface quote, intro info justice and what that entails [i already express my belief of the human right to info in my preface]/ "Information systems cannot be neutral with respect to justice" (Johnson, 2016). //bridge to curation section, so like a gen sentence or two about systems needing to acknowledge justice in their creation/

Curation is also in the conversation of information justice. Some of the founding principles strive to increase accessibility to information. However, there is still susceptibility to perpetuate the inequalities. Curators act as mediators between raw information and the audience, assisting in interpretation. While actions may be conducted with good intent such as providing new insights or improving understanding, curators perpetuate the values of the systems they use and can insert bias or skew information from its contexts. This practice, if done improperly, can cause ramifications on the well-being of those represented and those who view the work. Being in this age of information, our society uses information as a social capital (Dabir & Azarpira, 2016) and the basis of education. Information affects how we make decisions and interact with one another and the world. Skewing information in effect changes public memory and can cause varying severity of consequences including discrimination and violence against specific populations. Notions of misinformation and disinformation have been focal conversations of the discipline. 

// can I bridge this transition, more/ This led to the question how can digital curation methodologies be ethically applied to curate items for interdisciplinary education at Allegheny College? To answer this, I have planned my work into three distinct sections: information gathering, application, and documentation. While these are seemingly distinct, these phases will likely be closely intertwined and even cycled through recursively in practice. 

The first chapter features the information gathering phase. I conducted a literature review on the best practices for digital curation. // Prep the lit review, maybe highlight the section headers/ While it dove into the important discussions, this review did not illuminate much creation and functionality of the published digital archives. To highlight current practices, I paired this literature review with a scoping review of published archives focused on information architecture and technical documentation. //Prep the scoping, highlight what I was looking for?/ The digital archives were selected from the ones cited as examples in the reviewed literature. // highlight major findings themes? if not covered by previous sentences/

These findings were the basis for the next phase of the project: application. I created a digital archive representing the standards found. Though this digital artifact stands as public deliverable, the documentation of choices and the framework of the archival workflow are the featured work in chapter two. This chapter also features the application of the archival workflow with an item serving as a case study for my work. Of the many items donated to the institution, I had the opportunity to apply my research to a piece very recently gifted to Allegheny College. Visually, this piece is a tall cylindrical wooden pole featuring Southeast Asian indigenous wood carving techniques as well as natural elements like shells and grasses along with red, white, and black pigments. From the research given to me, this object was created post-1981 (Bocchi, n.d.) and purchased in Jakarta in the early 1990s. With this given background and some crucial visual features, we are able to conclude that this item is an art-for-export piece rather than an indigenous ritual bis pole. The wooden sculpture was specifically created for tourist consumption. Discussing repatriation is one of many manifestations of our archival workflow with this piece. My research and work will not complete the curation of this piece but instead acts as a working model of ethical curation at this institution. This project will utilize, comment, and suggest improvements for the archival process of items accepted into Allegheny College's archive. 

The last phase is documentation and reflection. While topically focused on how we document and preserve items, this project will also be conducted with the same goals in mind. The archive and workflow are created to be replicable and sustainable, flexible but guiding for future curation. The only way to preserve this is through documentation. Most of the documentation will be attached to the digital archive in the repository or discussed in chapter two to explain technical decisions and. Chapter three will feature the reflections, especially through the lenses of global health studies and integrative informatics. The last chapter will also feature overall conclusions and claims that arose from the research and creation process through the lenses of global health and informatics. 

