# Preserving Context: A Senior Project Proposal for Digital Curation and Archival Workflow

## 3.18 Proposal, Defense Edition

### Kate Folkenroth
Global Health Studies & Integrative Informatics Double Major

#### Table of Contents:

- [Introduction](#Introduction)
- [Topic & Keywords](#Topic-&-keywords)
- [Literature Review](#Literature-review)
- [Research Question](#Research-question)
- [Project Aims](#Project-aims)
- [Expected Final Product](#Expected-final-product)
- [Methods](#Methods)
- [Global Health Context](#Global-health-context)
- [Proposed Timeline](#Proposed-timeline)
- [Budget](#Budget)

### Introduction

    All over the world, information and communication are becoming more digitized. This has contributed to the tension of an overabundance of information and scarcity of what can be used. There is still a need for traditional methods of information dissemination such as locations like museums and libraries or mediums like posters, physical exhibits, or newspapers. However, these are now being joined by new digital counterparts to assist in this age of information overload. Technology has allowed us to catalog and archive anything anywhere that can be accessed by those with the ability to access the internet. Institutions of various sizes now are able to support their own repositories and archives, rather than just those with strong programs supporting curation. Curation is the process of collecting, selecting, organizing, storing, and displaying items with their respective information. Digital curation does this with digital content, storage, displays and thus acts as a tool for the long-term preservation and access to the necessary resources (Sabharwal, 2015, p. 12). Overall, this work is relatively new as a discipline and becoming common as a methodology but has only started to develop sets of best practices. These practices have not been standardized as the locations and mediums of archived items are quite variable, each with its own respective needs. Allegheny College does not currently have an interdisciplinary standard for archival workflow, especially featuring digital curation, for their items across campus. 

    Of the many items donated to the institution, I have the opportunity to catalog an Indonesian bis pole sculpture. Visually, this piece is a tall cylindrical wooden pole featuring Asmat wood carving techniques as well as natural elements like shells and grasses along with white, red, and black pigments. This object was created post-1981 (Bocchi, n.d.) and purchased in Jakarta in the early 1990s. Starting with this background information and some crucial visual features, we are able to confirm that this item is an art-for-export piece rather than an Asmat ritual bis pole. The wooden sculpture was specifically created for tourist consumption. This discussion of repatriation is only the start of the archival workflow that should be conducted to properly and ethically catalog items in Allegheny College's archive which my project plans to model.


### Literature Review

    Before being able to start collecting information on the Indonesian bis pole sculpture, the methodologies of digital curation needs to be understood first. As the dissemination of information has become more digital and applied to the fields of the humanities, new disciplines have emerged, even explicitly called digital humanities. Curation, specifically digital or hybrid, is often seen as a practice or methodology while also sometimes recognized as its own discipline emerging from digital humanities or informatics. This background information guided a larger search for literature on the matter.  

    Due to the very interdisciplinary nature of this work, Allegheny College's Pelletier AggreGator was chosen to conduct the search for literature on digital curation. The keywords entered were "long term data preservation AND hybrid curation AND digital humanities AND (informatics OR anthropology)" to reach the desired articles that featured ethics, anthropology, and computer science discourse. These keywords also allowed for articles that addressed how digital practices interact with analog or other traditional practices. Finally, the filter of "scholarly and peer-reviewed" as well as the limit to publications in the last ten years narrowed the search to 74 articles that were combed through to conduct this literature review. Most of these sources addressed the method as digital curation, solidifying my focus only on digital curation for this project. With these available sources, I read to determine the distinguishing characteristics of digital curation as a process of archiving and long-term data preservation from the perspective of digital humanists to capture the interdisciplinary conversation. 


    Though these have been briefly introduced, terms like data, information lifecycle, archive, and digital curation have carried various definitions as they are used in different fields of study. There has been an exploration of how digital curation has become its own mature disciple that overarches information science (Higgins, 2018). This origin of digital curation growing into what Dr. Sarah Higgins deems a "sub-meta-discipline" creates interesting dynamics with other disciplines as it "transcends and influences all of [the information science] disciplines and sub-discipline" (Higgins, 2018, pp. 1332). This difficulty is reiterated by Dr. Rebecca Grant in her paper about research data management (2017). She explains how there is a severe lack of distinction between digital curation, data curation, and research data management to such an extent that in discussions on practices, digital collection may include analog material. This highlights the same difficulty of the literature found in this review as many of these pieces do not always distinguish their use of digital curation. 

    As the discipline of digital curation is still being refined, the methodology and theories are also still being developed for curation. The breadth of this umbrella term has even stated that digital curation is the user's interactions with the structure of the digital archive (Davis, 2017). This places digital curation under the theory of attention, it matters how people allocate, acquire and control the information. This is important to consider as digital curation should have the user experience at the forefront of their work. From the perspective of library and information science, this work of curation is seen within the many associated skills and roles of data science (Virkus & Garoufallou, 2019). In the nine roles proposed, three roles completely overlap the discussion of what curation is in the digital humanities. These roles include data manager, data librarian, and data steward/curator. This sectioning in data science further proves the need to not be restrictive on the terminology of what digital curation is in publications as well as a need to define what will be used for this project. This forces us to rely on the vague definition of digital curators working on ways to collect, organize, and then disseminate information to users digitally. 
    
   While there are many labels and descriptions of the job as curators, the most important part discussed in the literature is the added meaning to information through selection and organization. When implementing curation in the classroom, Dr. Jolie Sheffer and Stefanie Hunker wanted to show how knowledge of a subject is shaped by particular contexts and framing by having students create projects of their own using curation techniques (2019). They found that their students had firsthand experience of connecting sources together for new interpretations and innovative displays for their exhibits. This selection and organization practice allowed for a demonstration of this meaning-making process. Dr. Alona Forkosh Baruch and Dr. Rivka Gadot also looked at curation's role in education as they attempted to characterize the curation activity of teachers. As they were describing what curation is, they wrote "The curation process produces snippets of knowledge that are connected into meaningful content, thereby examining a topic from diverse perspectives, using various resources" (Forkosh Baruch & Gadot, 2021). This connection that they describe is the added value that curation does, which is echoed throughout the literature that makes it worthy of its own discipline and discourse. Some have been going as far to ask for curation work to be held with the same value of text-heavy publications of conventional scholars (Siddiqui, 2015). This is an important acknowledgment of this value even though the material that is being organized is not the curators' original research and does not require expertise in the subject, rather just collaboration and reflexivity.

   One difficulty with curation is this core concept of intermediation. Curators act as mediators for the public and its history. There is a strong argument for disintermediation (Sabharwal, 2017) where the public is in charge of its own memory and history. This lack of refinement also aligns with the discussion that data is a commodity that should be free and open access for anyone to look at and interpret meaning on their own (Mauthner & Parry, 2013). Many issues arise with this as structural violence affects the outcome of a communities ability to do this. This is inequity in access and education to understand raw data. Without proper consideration, minorities may be systematically erased in the larger social narrative. This has brought forward the concept of slow archives (Christen & Anderson, 2019) as a solution. These archives aren't slow in the sense of temporality but rather done with the intention to be ethically created with a focus on quality rather than quantity or rapidness. This push is for curators to work with the public to create the archive and have a recursive archival workflow to start working towards decolonized curation. This has especially been seen between indigenous peoples working with curators to preserve their information. Though this discussion of decolonizing curation could be a full composition in itself, the concept of knowledge organization is worthy to note as it distinguishes curation from other methods. Knowledge organization can reinforce semantic frameworks (Sabharwal, 2021) through metadata. For example, this can promote English over the original language of information as the metadata is often standardized in the curators' language which sustains the hierarchies of collection. This has led to solutions like parallel metadata and other innovative approaches. These issues that arise from adding meaning through information organization are crucial to note as future practices should continue to work towards not continuing these colonial practices.

    Focusing on the purpose of using curation, the literature combined concepts of use, reuse, and sharing of data. Improvements are constantly being suggested, but these concepts highlight the main focuses of curation. Dr. Tarvo Kärberg highlights the use of pre-ingest activities for curation (2013). With intentional work being at the focus of the curation, the curation work conducted following these activities is more likely to be of higher quality. His work also showed how it was possible to reuse other metadata systems to improve the quality of archive descriptions. These concepts of use and reuse are directly correlated with the ability to utilize this information in education. This allows the information in the archive to be interacted with for the purpose it is put together for, education or otherwise. Along with improving the quality of the data that is there for use is the usability of display structure to reach and display the information. Often hybrid approaches are cited (McCarthy et al., 2015) as the best way to increase usability. By merging two known ways of how to access the information, a larger audience has more access to information available. These ideas of quality and access are essential to the curators' job. This will be more important to consider for the future of items in collections rather than just living in a digital state. 

    From the difficulties of curation arises the importance of collaboration, especially with multidisciplinary teams. A solution to the epistemological difficulties of reusing qualitative data has been the use of collaborative curation practices (Karcher et al., 2021). This collaboration, along with data management practices and technological advances, allow for more context and ensure ethical sharing of information so that it may be possible to reuse this qualitative information. In 2013, Dr. Alex Poole discussed this future of sharing as well while also reinforcing the need for collaboration and cooperation. This is what Poole cites as the key to the long-term sustainability of information. This sustainability allows for longer periods of time to reuse information for its intended purpose. This sustainability is echoed by Dr. Colin Post and Dr. Alexandra Chassanoff. They highlight that keeping tensions between local and professional contexts at the forefront of curation work is necessary for sustaining archival infrastructure long-term (2021). This reflects the need for both trained standardized practices for curation but also allowing for flexibility with the needs of local contexts. Without diverse collaboration, the quality of curated products is questionable and not sustainable. 

    Collaboration is not just a solution nor unique to curation, but a vital part of distinguishing this methodology from other information science disciplines. As Sheila Anderson and Dr. Tobias Blanke followed the digital evolution of science disciplines and now the humanities, they iterated the importance of collaboration. They compared the definitions of e-Science and "At their core is the idea of collaboration and sharing between and across communities – whether sharing research data, compute power or other resources– in order to enable new forms of enquiry, and the generation and understanding of new research questions'' (Anderson & Blanke, 2012). This identification of collaborative work in e-Science was seen again in all of the examples such as anthropologists and computer scientists collaborating to complete new digital humanities projects. The digital humanities inquiry in itself is based on the collaboration model (Maryl et al., 2020). To promote this methodology of digital curation, Dr. Natasha Mauthner and Odette Parry focus on the policies that help facilitate researchers to curate their work (2013). They found that some of the most successful attempts to facilitate archives were due to the collaboration of the researcher and some entity that specializes in curation, like another organization, team, or single curator. By working together, this process happens more often and more ethically. 

    This distinguishing factor of collaboration is helpful as it highlights the necessity of having multiple perspectives on the same archive or project. Uniting these varying practices and specialties can create new innovative standards to improve the ethics of collection. There is no set practice in the work to follow or even review projects for their ethicalities but there is still the question of the quality of an archive. 
	
    After the completion of curation work, one difficulty derived from the nature of the work is how to measure its success. While other fields may have more obvious ways to measure success, curation lacks specific standards to judge this abstract concept. Abrams attempts to capture this in four categories for evaluating the success of digital preservation (2021). These four categories are accessibility, integrity, authenticity, and usability. This unsurprisingly reflects many of the distinguishing factors of digital curation that have been common in the literature. New ideas articulated in this piece include the concepts of integrity and authenticity. These ideas highlight the responsibilities of the curator(s) to be transparent and construct a trustworthy workflow. This transparency can also help reduce future replication crises (Slingerland et al., 2020) that may occur in many fields. Integrating transparency by documenting an archival workflow can improve the reproducibility and sustainability of archives. Accessibility and usability reflect the use, reuse, and sharing of the work. As this focuses on the experience of the user and quantifying these categories for measuring success, it also summarizes the important characteristics of curation work. 
	
   With these factors in mind, this methodology of digital curation is based on much of the main concerns that arise with mediation. The social responsibility of curators is intertwined with their occupational responsibilities to collect, store, and display quality information that is accessible and usable. Collaboration and awareness of how to ensure the quality of the archive will be important considerations to highlight in the reflexive practices of curation. After parsing through these themes from the literature, these articles will start as a solid foundation for a larger literature review for best practices. Moving towards the creation of the archive, it will also be worthwhile to look specifically at projects that have already been created that can model or guide this project's use of technology or tools. These sources will act as guidance for an information architecture analysis as many projects were cited to explain these distinguishing characteristics of curation.


### Research Question

How can digital curation methodologies be ethically applied to catalog items for use in interdisciplinary education at Allegheny College?

### Project Aims

My project's primary goal is to use digital curation for an ethical, educational, and sustainable archive of the Indonesian bis pole sculpture. This will be accomplished by completing several smaller goals before achieving this final construct. 

First, I hope to attain an understanding of the best practices and current tools used for digital curation. Second, I hope to create a framework of archival workflow for Allegheny College. This will be focused on ethical archives and the potential for displays in public spaces for interdisciplinary education. 

With the completion of these pieces, this project will catalog this artifact while creating an accessible digital archive connected to the physical item.



### Expected Final Product

The final product of this project will be seen in the deliverables of a digital archive and a final written composition. The composition will feature a literature review, information architecture analysis, archival workflow, and reflection. The literature review will focus on the best practices of curation. The information architecture analysis will be focused on digital collections, as mentioned in the literature, especially focused on how the information is organized and displayed. This gathered knowledge of practices, technology, and techniques will then be applied as I curate the donated Indonesian bis pole sculpture. The digital archive will be created and run through GitHub pages which can be accessed publicly on the internet. With the completion of the digital archive, the last portion of the composition will surmise the process and application of hybrid curation while reflecting on the implications of this work in the fields of global health and informatics.

### Methods 

Due to the construction of this project, the methods will be uniquely specific to my work to achieve the proposed aims. The project will begin with information gathering seen in the form of a literature review paired with an information architecture analysis. This will be followed by the application of this information seen in the creation of an archival workflow and catalog of the item. The final documentation will reflect the process of using these methods, elaborate on ethical considerations, and discuss the implications of this work. 

Before being able to conduct any work with the donated item, I will be collecting current information on the methods of digital curation. The literature review will build on the preliminary one conducted for this proposal. It will focus specifically on the current best practices of digital curation. These pieces will then guide the selection of websites and tools for analysis. The information architecture analysis will focus on how these digital collections are structured and what techniques or tools are being utilized for their archives. It will be focused on the organization, use of metadata, usability especially considering the working of user experience and user interface design (UX/UI).

After gathering this information, I will be able to apply these digital curation methodologies to catalog this item. This will consist of walking through all of the steps of curation such as collecting and organizing the information into a digital archive. Due to the timeline of this project, I will only be focusing on the digital archive for this item and only considering the possibility of an installation and hybrid exhibit. The technology and digital archives are seen as a different (and sometimes better) way to access, preserve, and enrich information beyond what can be done with only analog methods (Sabharwal, 2021; Sheffer & Hunker, 2019; Siddiqui, 2015). Though it may not completely replace analog practices, the use of this digital curation has an important place in improving the possibilities in archives.

With replication and sustainability in mind, a template or bare framework will be an important portion of this developed archival workflow. The creation of this template should allow for quick and relatively easy input of information to create a functional, accessible, and enriching digital archive. My highly interdisciplinary position will allow me to set up this technology and workflow with considerations for others who likely specialize in one or various combinations of these disciplines, especially for those who may not have the same level of technical training. The item's index will be created from this template while also acting as an example for the possibilities of additional linked sections which would be seen when other objects similarly have projects conducted with them. Overall, this application of hybrid curation will act as a model for an ethical archival workflow that can be reused or even improved upon with future iterations. 

This digital format of the archive will be in a website framework hosted on GitHub with influence from the techniques and technology discovered in the information architecture analysis. I will likely be writing the code in HTML and CSS with additional languages for functionality. The organization of the information will likely be in sections reflecting what I have already identified as the global health context for this Indonesian bis pole sculpture such as its position as an art-for-export in the context of power and economics. This has the flexibility to adjust as I collect and parse through more available information for this piece.

Following the creation of these deliverables, the last portion of this composition will consist of documentation and reflection. This will be dedicated to formalizing my notes and experiences of the application process into this reusable and understandable workflow. 

As curators continue to decolonize their practices by adding time for reflexivity (Christen & Anderson, 2019), I will add this time throughout my process but dedicate this last third of my work to reflexivity. The documentation will include conversations and thought processes around actively incorporating ethics considering other implications of this work. This work will function with considerations about intermediation (Sabharwal, 2017) which is one of the large conversations occurring amongst curators and other digital humanists. Other concepts such as representation, power, and ownership will be heavily considered as well.  

These ethical considerations lead to how one can measure the success of the archive. This construct of success cannot be directly or indirectly observed. Abrams (2021) suggests from their research that we can use the proxies of accessibility, integrity, authenticity, and usability to gauge the success of an archive. This will lead me to interdisciplinary collaboration as we work through these questions of how to successfully use digital tools for a functional final product while conveying the integrity of the archive as I act in the role of curator.

Though I am not an expert in the geographic region, peoples, or material, I am still prepared to complete work for this project. As already mentioned, curators are not often experts of the collections they work with due to the overabundance of information. This workflow will be designed for flexible and, more importantly, collaborative archiving. Naturally, my dual interdisciplinary majors will facilitate some of this collaboration with plans to include more perspectives on this work. From my coursework and internship opportunities, I have been able to focus on transdisciplinary ethics of data collection, storage, and display. I had the opportunity to be an Ethics Technical Leader. I specialized in holistic project display and website development, using many of the tools I have already discussed for the digital archive. With my humanities focus in the field of global health, I have entered many conversations on ethical practices and their relation to health. This has been especially seen in narrative and data representation as well as discussions on the commodification of cultures. Lastly, this information is collected and organized for the hopes of use in education. My work as an instructional designer for global health courses and program coordinator for Teach Global Health has prepared me to create this work with consideration of decolonizing education and transparency in data. With all of these in consideration, all of the work I have conducted at Allegheny College has led me to this unique position to complete this project.

### Global Health Context

Global Health Studies is an interdisciplinary field that has been pedagogically split into four distinct dimensions: science and the environment, power and economics, ethics and social responsibility, and cultures and society. My proposed project intersects with these dimensions on many levels, though it will mostly be focused on population-level health. This project has two distinctive focuses, one on the actual item and the second on the larger implications of digital curation and health.  

*Indonesian Bis Pole Sculpture*

     Focusing on the donated item, this piece represents some important topics in the field of global health. Central to this item is its place in the conversation of the commodification of culture. This Indonesian bis pole sculpture was created as an art-for-export. It was meant for tourist consumption which speaks to the power and privilege of those making it in comparison to those buying this item. This highlights self-commodification as they sell these sculptures featuring traditional woodcarving techniques and mimicking their ritual bis poles. This is also in close conversation with resource extraction that they did to make these pieces for tourists. These wooden poles are made out of endangered and vulnerable plant species like the Bornean ironwood trees, native to Indonesia. Overall, this history and reliance on tourism for income will be an important discussion as it reinforces inequality with native populations. My work will only dive deeper into these connections to then be displayed in the archive created through digital curation.

*Digital Curation*

    Thinking of larger implications of using these methodologies, curation holds an important place in narratives and public memory. Curators hold this responsibility to act as a mediator of data for the public. This history of collection and preservation of curation is deeply rooted in colonial practices. Of the many important features, it is important to recognize that the act of curating can affect the positional power structure and narrative of history. These locations of curation, like museums especially, cannot avoid being part of the discussion about social justice (Diaz & Paneto, 2020). Unethical curation can whitewash history, erase cultures from narratives, or spread misinformation. The actual information in archives, just like this project, may hold explicit ties to conversations of justice. Objectivity is an impossible standard, ethical practices and standards are the way to begin to decolonize curation. When curation is completed without these ethical considerations, societal structures may be reinforced and exacerbate the violence already being experienced by certain populations.

    Even when information or exhibits do not directly relate to health topics, they still affect the wellbeing of those who view and those represented. These displays create empathy between the viewers and the content. This connection is important as it affects perceptions of different groups and even spurs some to activism. It is a part of curators' responsibility to represent items holistically and create these spaces for self-education that promote global communities and provide cultural context especially when items may be outside of their original context. This also allows archives and exhibits to counter some of the inequities experienced in education and may act as a resource for classrooms. The responsibility of the curator is not only to those represented by the content of the archive but also to those who will be consumers of the archive.

    These contexts of global health studies shape the content of this composition. The sculpture as a material item represents the destruction of the environment and the commodification of culture. This object is also representative of the economic exchange seen with tourism. These three facets of the object greatly affect the well-being of the creators of this sculpture as they sell these as their livelihood. Curation as a whole will continue to work with these tensions of power and privilege as it collects and preserves information while making contributions to conversations on social justice in the process of dissemination, educational and otherwise.


### Proposed Timeline

*Refer to Google Docs: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1mQEpVl6QfEaD3YiRdkefcQTeMpbd5m-P7hO5W5g1ncY/edit?usp=sharing*

### Budget

This project will not require a budget. The texts I am using for my literature review are free and publicly available or accessed through the Allegheny library services. The digital space and software for the digital exhibit are already available under the existing Allegheny cyberinfrastructure. There are no budgetary concerns for the scope of my project. A physical installation or display will not be addressed in this work beyond general consideration for this potential occurrence after the completion of this project.