# Chapter 1

## introduction
We live in the information era, known for our shift from traditional industry to new information technology. Along with this shift is the reality of computerization and digital aspects of life. The combination of the two has allowed for unfathomable amounts of data preserved, stored, accessed, processed, visualized, and displayed from all over the world. While these facts are great achievements of society, these do not reflect the unanticipated consequences. Unfathomable storage and preservation requires systems to allow any of this data to be found and usable. These problems are the basis of curation. Curation is the process of collecting, selecting, organizing, storing, and displaying items with their respective information. While curation has an origin with museum studies, the process has developed into an overarching methodology in many mediums, especially digital. Digital curation completes the same process but with digital content, storage, or displays allowing for the information to have a longer data lifecycle (Sabharwal, 2015, p. 12). This enters interesting conversations as scholars debate over concepts of infinite data storage space and the potential lack of depreciation of digital resources. Even amongst these utopian theories, the practicality of infinite storage is not a reality for many archives with depleting resources and digitization initiatives only starting in many repositories. 

Digital curation as practice has been seen in various forms for half a century yet still lacks clear standards and best practices. More importantly, curation, in all of its forms, is intermediation and a practice with consequences. If done improperly, the work can have tremendous ramifications on public memory, the well-being of people and communities, and even reinforce harm that has already occurred. Anything that affects information dissemination, namely education, can cause undue harm in forms of misinformation and disinformation. Archives work with the primary sources of information but may be affected by improper mediation as we need curators to make this information accessible. Since digital curation practices have not been standardized, various locations and mediums of archived items are archived with often only their own respective needs of accessibility in mind. Without universal standards to follow, there is more potential for improper curation and the consequences that come with this. Curators and scholars must rely on recent publications and projects to understand this depth of digital practice. By reflecting on published methods and workflows, common themes and shared definitions can be noted. As I gathered information for this project, I split my time equally between recently published articles and published archives with their documentation. 

## lit review methods
Focusing on language and scholarly reflections on digital curation, I used Allegheny College's Pelletier AggreGator to conduct this literature review. This database was appropriate to reflect the interdisciplinary needs of my search. The keywords entered were "long term data preservation AND hybrid curation AND digital humanities AND (informatics OR anthropology)" to reach the desired articles that featured ethics, anthropology, and computer science discourse. These keywords also allowed for articles that addressed how digital practices interact with analog or other traditional practices. While this project is solely focused on the digital curation and potential exhibition of items, it is impossible have pure digital curation without some discussion of the physical objects or the digitization of them. Finally, the filter of "scholarly and peer-reviewed" and limitation to publications from the last ten years narrowed the search to 74 articles that were combed through to conduct this literature review. Most of these sources addressed the method as digital curation, solidifying my focus to only digital for this project.With these available sources, I then parsed through to determine the distinguishing characteristics of digital curation as a process of archiving and long-term data preservation from the perspective of digital humanists to capture the interdisciplinary conversation.

### subsection- digital curation as its own discipline
Digital Curation as Its Own Discipline

Though I have already briefly introduced a simple definition of digital curation, it is important to note it is not always defined this way. Only in the last ten years has there been a specific exploration of the digital curation in its own right. Digital curation has now become its own mature disciple that overarches information science (Higgins, 2018). From its origin as just a part of other disciplines, digital curation has grown into what Dr. Sarah Higgins deems a "sub-meta-discipline" which has created interesting dynamics with other disciplines as it "transcends and influences all of [the information science] disciplines and sub-discipline" (Higgins, 2018, pp. 1332). This origin of digital curation is important to note as it affects the terminology used in discipline. The terminology is brought from many different disciplines and now holds similar but often new meaning when used in curation. This conglomeration of terminology has required a new standard of glossaries paired with publications and works. This complexity of discipline identification is reiterated by Dr. Rebecca Grant in her paper about research data management (2017). 

///She explains how there is a severe lack of distinction between digital curation, data curation, and research data management to such an extent that in published discussions on practices, digital collections may include analog material.//

This reflects the same difficulty I found in this information gathering process as many of these pieces do not always distinguish their use of digital curation from other curatorial practices. 

```
 Even though it is now recognized as its own discipline, 

```

As the discipline of digital curation continues to be refined, the methodology and theories are also still being developed for curation. The breadth of this umbrella term has even stated that digital curation is all of the user's interactions with the structure of the digital archive (Davis, 2017). This places digital curation under the theory of attention– that it matters how people allocate, acquire and control the information. This is important to consider as digital curation should have the user experience at the forefront of their work and consider how their structure works to deliver the information. From the perspective of library and information science, this work of curation is seen within the many associated skills and roles of data science (Virkus & Garoufallou, 2019). In the nine roles proposed, three roles completely overlap the discussion of what curation is in the digital humanities. These roles are the data manager, data librarian, and data steward/curator. These divisions in data science further demonstrate the need to not be restrictive on the terminology of what digital curation is in publications as well as a need to define what will be used for this project. This is important as I continue to parse through literature and analyze other archives since they may not be labeling their work and job titles as any of these labels. This reinforces our need to rely on the umbrella definition of digital curators: those who collect, organize, and then disseminate information to users digitally. 

<!-- writing pt-->



        As the discipline of digital curation continues to be refined, the methodology and theories are also still being developed for curation. The breadth of this umbrella term has even stated that digital curation is all of the user's interactions with the structure of the digital archive (Davis, 2017). This places digital curation under the theory of attention– that it matters how people allocate, acquire and control the information. This is important to consider as digital curation should have the user experience at the forefront of their work and consider how their structure works to deliver the information.

        Focusing on the purpose of using curation, the literature combined concepts of use, reuse, and sharing of data. Improvements are constantly being suggested that can be implemented into documented workflows, but these concepts highlight the main foci of curation. Dr. Tarvo Kärberg highlights the use of pre-ingest activities, any work that occurs while acquiring the item, for curation (2013). These activities work to build better metadata records for the item and attempt to prevent large issues for curators that may occur in the middle of the process of archiving an item. With this intentional collection work being completed ahead of time, the curation work conducted following these activities is more likely to be of higher quality. His work also showed how it was possible to reuse other metadata systems to improve the quality of archive descriptions. These concepts of use and reuse are directly correlated with the ability to utilize this information in education. This allows the information in the archive to be interacted with for the purpose it is put together for, education or otherwise. Along with improving the quality of the data that is available, the quality of the display and the usability of the information structure are also of note. Often hybrid approaches are cited (McCarthy et al., 2015) as the best way to increase usability in information architecture. By merging analog and digital ways to access the information, a larger audience has more access to information available. These ideas of quality and access are essential to the curators' job. This will be more important to consider for the future of items in collections rather than just living in a digital state. 


          Stemming from some of the difficulties of curation is the importance of collaboration, especially the work of multidisciplinary teams. A solution to the epistemological difficulties of reusing qualitative data has been the use of collaborative curation practices (Karcher et al., 2021). This collaboration, along with data management practices and technological advances, allow for more context and ensure ethical sharing of information so that it may be possible to reuse this qualitative information. In 2013, Dr. Alex Poole discussed this future of sharing as well while also reinforcing the need for collaboration and cooperation. This is what Poole cites as the key to the long-term sustainability of information. This sustainability allows for longer periods of time to reuse information for its intended purpose. This sustainability is echoed by Dr. Colin Post and Dr. Alexandra Chassanoff. They highlight that keeping tensions between local and professional contexts at the forefront of curation work is necessary for sustaining archival infrastructure long-term (2021). This reflects the need for both trained standardized practices for curation but also allowing for flexibility with the needs of local contexts. Without multidisciplinary collaboration, the quality of curated products is questionable and not sustainable. 


        Collaboration is more than just a solution to problems in curation. It is a vital part of distinguishing this methodology from other disciplines in the field of information science. As Sheila Anderson and Dr. Tobias Blanke followed the digital evolution of science disciplines and now the humanities, they iterated the importance of collaboration. They compared the definitions of e-Science and "At their core is the idea of collaboration and sharing between and across communities – whether sharing research data, compute power or other resources– in order to enable new forms of enquiry, and the generation and understanding of new research questions'' (Anderson & Blanke, 2012). This identification of collaborative work in e-Science was seen again in all of the examples such as anthropologists and computer scientists collaborating to complete new digital humanities projects. The digital humanities inquiry in itself is based on the collaboration model (Maryl et al., 2020). To promote this methodology of digital curation, Dr. Natasha Mauthner and Odette Parry focus on the policies that help facilitate researchers to curate their work (2013). They found that some of the most successful attempts to facilitate archives were due to the collaboration of the researcher and some entity that specializes in curation, like another organization, team, or single curator. By working together, this process happens more often and more ethically. 
        This distinguishing factor of collaboration is helpful as it highlights the necessity of having multiple perspectives on the same archive or project. Uniting these varying practices and specialties can create new innovative standards to improve the ethics of collection. There is no set practice in the work to follow or even review projects for their ethicalities but there is still the question of the quality of an archive.


        
        While there are many labels and descriptions of curators' jobs, the most important part discussed in the literature is the job of adding meaning to information through selection and organization. When implementing curation in the classroom, Dr. Jolie Sheffer and Stefanie Hunker wanted to show how knowledge of a subject is shaped by particular contexts and framing by having students create projects of their own using curation techniques (2019). They found that their students had firsthand experience of connecting sources together for new interpretations and innovative displays for their exhibits. This selection and organization practice allowed for a demonstration of this meaning-making process. Dr. Alona Forkosh Baruch and Dr. Rivka Gadot also looked at curation's role in education as they attempted to characterize the curation activity of teachers. As they were describing what curation is, they wrote "The curation process produces snippets of knowledge that are connected into meaningful content, thereby examining a topic from diverse perspectives, using various resources" (Forkosh Baruch & Gadot, 2021). This connection that they describe as the added value from curation, which is echoed throughout the literature, makes it worthy of its own discipline and discourse. Some have been going as far as to ask for curation work to be held with the same value as text-heavy publications of conventional scholars (Siddiqui, 2015). This is an important acknowledgment of this value even though the material that is being organized is not the curators' original research and does not require expertise in the subject, rather just collaboration and reflexivity. 

        One difficulty with curation is this core concept of intermediation. Curators act as mediators for the public and its history. There is a strong argument for disintermediation (Sabharwal, 2017) where the public is in charge of its own memory and history. This lack of refinement also aligns with the discussion that data is a commodity that should be free and open access for anyone to look at and interpret meaning on their own (Mauthner & Parry, 2013). Many issues arise with this as structural violence affects the outcome of a communities ability to do this. This is inequity in access and education to understand raw data. Without proper consideration, minorities may be systematically erased in the larger social narrative. This has brought forward the concept of slow archives (Christen & Anderson, 2019) as a solution. These archives aren't slow in the sense of temporality but rather done with the intention to be ethically created with a focus on quality rather than quantity or rapidness. This push is for curators to work with the public to create the archive and have a recursive archival workflow to start working towards decolonized curation. This has especially been seen among indigenous peoples working with curators to preserve their information. Though this discussion of decolonizing curation could be a full composition in itself, the concept of knowledge organization is worthy to note as it distinguishes curation from other methods. Knowledge organization can reinforce semantic frameworks (Sabharwal, 2021) through metadata. For example, this can promote English over the original language of information as the metadata is often standardized in the curators' language which sustains the hierarchies of collection. This has led to solutions like parallel metadata and other innovative approaches. These issues that arise from adding meaning through information organization are crucial to note as future practices should continue to work towards not continuing these colonial practices.

      

      {{{

        However without proper consideration by mediators or majorities in communities, minorities may be systematically erased in the larger social narrative. 


        Focused on sharing data, it has been noted that improved curation of research facilitates more collaboration. As Sheila Anderson and Dr. Tobias Blanke followed the digital evolution of science disciplines and now the humanities, they iterated the importance of collaboration. They compared the definitions of e-Science and "At their core is the idea of collaboration and sharing between and across communities – whether sharing research data, compute power or other resources– in order to enable new forms of enquiry, and the generation and understanding of new research questions'' (Anderson & Blanke, 2012). Using the ability and power of digital connection and collaboration started the need for better standards of documentation and context. This identification of collaborative work in e-Science was seen again in all of the examples such as anthropologists and computer scientists collaborating to complete new digital humanities projects. The digital humanities inquiry in itself is based on the collaboration model (Maryl et al., 2020). Beyond just digitizing and sharing, curation became the method to share data at a better standard. Dr. Natasha Mauthner and Odette Parry focused on the policies that help facilitate researchers to curate their work (2013). They found that some of the most successful attempts to facilitate archives were due to the collaboration of the researcher and some entity that specializes in curation, like another organization, team, or single curator. By working together, this process happens more often and more ethically encouraging the sharing and reuse of the original research conducted.

      }}}

<!-- writing pt-->



Evaluating the Archives
        After the completion of curation work, one difficulty derived from the nature of the work is how to measure its success. While other fields may have more obvious ways to measure success, curation lacks specific standards to judge this abstract concept. Abrams attempts to capture this in four categories for evaluating the success of digital preservation (2021). These four categories are accessibility, integrity, authenticity, and usability. This unsurprisingly reflects many of the distinguishing factors of digital curation that have been common in the literature. New ideas articulated in this piece include the concepts of integrity and authenticity. These ideas highlight the responsibilities of the curator(s) to be transparent and construct a trustworthy workflow. This transparency can also help reduce future replication crises (Slingerland et al., 2020) that may occur in many fields. Integrating transparency by documenting an archival workflow can improve the reproducibility and sustainability of archives. Accessibility and usability reflect the use, reuse, and sharing of the work. As this focuses on the experience of the user and quantifying these categories for measuring success, it also summarizes the important characteristics of curation work.

    This literature cannot stand alone to envision the entirety of what must be considered when conducting digital curation. Current practices must also be considered as published is often retrospective and often does always reflect details on technical, ethical, and general humanities considerations. This can be conducted with a modified information architecture analysis of published archives. These were chosen from the articles selected for the literature review. The analysis is modified to reflect the findings from the literature review highlighting the accessibility, integrity, authenticity, and usability. Technical practicality was also taken note of such as file types, data structure, and metadata standards which were not often featured in the reviewed literature.
    
    //TODO//

    With these two methods of gathering information on digital curation, this has reflected the current and best practices of digital curation. //TODO//

    These are all to be considered in the creation of the archival workflow for Allegheny College. 

