# Preserving Context: A Senior Project Proposal for Digital Curation and Archival Workflow

## 3.4 Proposal, version 2

### Kate Folkenroth
Global Health Studies & Integrative Informatics Double Major

#### Table of Contents:

- [Introduction](#Introduction)
- [Topic & Keywords](#Topic-&-keywords)
- [Literature Review](#Literature-review)
- [Research Question](#Research-question)
- [Project Aims](#Project-aims)
- [Expected Final Product](#Expected-final-product)
- [Methods](#Methods)
- [Global Health Context](#Global-health-context)
- [Proposed Timeline](#Proposed-timeline)
- [Budget](#Budget)

### Introduction

    All over the world, information and communication are becoming more digitized. There is still a need for traditional disseminations of information seen in locations like museums and libraries or mediums like posters, physical exhibits or newspapers. However, they are now being joined by new digital counterparts. Technology has allowed for us to catalog and archive almost anything anywhere that can be accessed by those with the ability to access the internet. With the overabundance of information seen from this digital age, we are faced with the scarcity of being able to access and use the information we have. Even institutions of smaller sizes now are able to support their own repositories and archives without having strong programs supporting curation. Curation is the process of collecting, selecting, organizing, storing, and displaying items with their respective information. Digital curation does this with digital content, storage, displays and thus acts as a tool for the long-term preservation and access to the necessary resources (Sabharwal, 2015, p. 12). Overall, this work is relatively new as a discipline and as common methodology but has begun to develop its own set of best practices. These practices have been quick in development but not standardized as the various locations and mediums of archived items have different needs. Often curators are not experts of the information they are working with in this time of overabundance. These two concepts of variability and ability to work without expertise creates a flexible and possible practice but uncharted territory for many institutions. Allegheny College does not currently have an interdisciplinary standard for archival workflow, especially featuring digital curation, for their items across campus.  

    Of the many items donated to the institution, I have the opportunity to catalog an Indonesian bis pole sculpture. Visually, this piece is a tall cylindrical wooden pole featuring Asmat wood carving techniques as well as including natural elements like shells and grasses along with white, red, and black pigments. This object was created post-1981 (Bocchi, n.d.) and purchased in Jakarta in the early 1990s. Starting with this small piece of information and some visual features, we are able to confirm that this item is an art-for-export piece rather than an Asmat ritual bis pole. The wooden sculpture was created for tourist consumption. This discussion of repatriation is only the start of the archival workflow that should be conducted to properly and ethically catalog items in Allegheny College's archive.


### Literature Review

    Before being able to start into collecting information on the Indonesian bis pole sculpture, the methodology of digital curation as the umbrella term that it is needed to be understood first. As this dissemination of information has become more digital and applied to the fields of the humanities, new disciplines have emerged, even explicitly called digital humanities. Curation, specifically digital or hybrid, is often seen as a methodology and then own discipline emerging from digital humanities or informatics. This background information guided a larger search for literature on the matter. 

    Due to the very interdisciplinary nature of this work, Allegheny College's Pelletier AggreGator was chosen to conduct the search. The keywords entered were "long term data preservation AND hybrid curation AND digital humanities AND (informatics OR anthropology)" to reach the desired articles that featured ethics, anthropology and computer science discourse. This also gives perspective to how digital interacts with analog and traditional practices for those sources that address hybrid methodology. Finally, the filter of "scholarly and peer reviewed" as well as the limit to publications in the last ten years narrowed the search to 74 articles that were combed through to conduct this literature review. Most of these sources addressed the method as digital curation, solidifying my focus only on digital curation. With these available sources, I hope to determine the distinguishing characteristics of digital curation as a process of archiving and long-term data preservation from the perspective of digital humanists to capture the interdisciplinary conversation.

    Though these have been briefly introduced, terms like data, information lifecycle, archive, and digital curation have carried various definitions as they are used in different fields of study. There has been an exploration of how digital curation has become its own mature disciple that overarches information science (Higgins, 2018). This origin of digital curation growing into what Dr. Sarah Higgins deems a "sub-meta-discipline" creates interesting dynamics with other disciplines as it "transcends and influences all of [the information science] disciplines and sub-discipline" (Higgins, 2018, pp. 1332). This difficulty is reiterated by Dr. Rebecca Grant in her paper about research data management (2017). She explains how there is a severe lack of distinction between digital curation, data curation, and research data management to such an extent that in discussions on practices, digital collection may include analog material. This highlights the same difficulty of the literature found in this review as many of these pieces do not always distinguish their use of digital curation.

    As the discipline of digital curation is still being refined, the methodology and theories are also still being developed for curation. The breadth of this umbrella term has even stated that digital curation is the user's interactions with the structure of the digital archive (Davis, 2017). This places digital curation under the theory of attention, it matters how people allocate, acquire and control the information. This is important to consider as digital curation should have the user experience at the forefront of their work. From the perspective of library and information science, this work of curation is seen within the many associated skills and roles of data science (Virkus & Garoufallou, 2019). In the nine roles proposed, three roles completely overlap the discussion of what curation is in the digital humanities. These roles include data manager, data librarian, and data steward/curator. This sectioning in data science further proves the need to not be restrictive on the terminology of what digital curation is in publications as well as a need to define what will be used for this project. This forces us to rely on the vague definition of digital curators working on ways to collect, organize, and then disseminate information to users digitally.
    
    While there are many labels and descriptions of the job as curators, the most important part discussed in the literature is the added meaning to information through selection and organization. When implementing curation in the classroom, Dr. Jolie Sheffer and Stefanie Hunker wanted to show how knowledge of a subject is shaped by particular contexts and framing by having students create projects of their own using curation techniques (2019). They found that their students had firsthand experience of connecting sources together for new interpretations and innovative displays for their exhibits. This selection and organization practice allowed for a demonstration of this meaning making process. Dr. Alona Forkosh Baruch and Dr. Rivka Gadot also looked at curation's role in education as they attempted to characterize the curation activity of teachers. As they were describing what curation is, they wrote "The curation process produces snippets of knowledge that are connected into meaningful content, thereby examining a topic from diverse perspectives, using various resources" (Forkosh Baruch & Gadot, 2021). This connection that they describe is the added value that curation does, that is echoed throughout the literature that makes it worthy of its own discipline and discourse. Some have been going as far to ask for curation work to be held with the same value of text-heavy publications of conventional scholars (Siddiqui, 2015). This is an important acknowledgement of this value even though the material that is being organized is not the curators' original research and does not require expertise in the subject, rather just collaboration and reflexivity.

    One difficulty about curation is this core concept of intermediation. Curators act as mediators for the public and its history. There is a strong argument for disintermediation (Sabharwal, 2017) where the public is in charge of its own memory and history. This lack of refinement also aligns with the discussion that data is a commodity that should be free and open access for anyone to look at and interpret meaning on their own (Mauthner & Parry, 2013). Many issues arise with this as structural violence affects the outcome of a communities ability to do this. This is inequity in access and education to understand raw data. Without proper consideration, minorities may be systematically erased in the larger social narrative. This has brought forward the concept of slow archives (Christen & Anderson, 2019) as a solution. These archives aren't slow in the sense of temporality but rather with intention to be done ethically with focus on quality rather than quantity or rapidness. This push is for curators to work with the public to create the archive and have a recursive archival workflow to start working towards decolonized curation. This has especially been seen between indigenous peoples working with curators to preserve their information. Though this discussion of decolonizing curation is worthy of having a full composition, the concept of knowledge organization is worthy to note as it distinguishes curation from other methods. Knowledge organization can reinforce semantic frameworks (Sabharwal, 2021) through metadata. For example, this can promote English over the original language of information as the metadata is often standardized in the curators' language which sustains the hierarchies of collection. This has led to solutions like parallel metadata and other innovative approaches. These issues that arise from adding meaning through organization are crucial to note as future practices should continue to work towards not continuing these colonial practices.

    Focusing on the purpose of using curation, the literature combined concepts of use, reuse, and sharing of data. Improvements are constantly being suggested, but these highlight the main focuses of curation. Dr. Tarvo Kärberg highlights the use of pre-ingest activities for curation (2013). With intention being at the focus of the curation, the curation work conducted following these activities are more likely to be of higher quality. His work also showed how it was possible to reuse other metadata systems to improve the quality of archive descriptions. These concepts of use and reuse are directly correlated with the ability to utilize this information in education. This allows the information that is collected to be interacted for the purpose it is put together for. Along with improving the quality of the data that is there for use is the usability of display structure to reach and display the information. Often hybrid approaches are cited (McCarthy et al., 2015) as the best way to increase usability. By merging two known ways of how to access the information, a larger audience has more access to information available. These ideas of quality and access are essential to the curators' job. This will be more important to consider for the future of items in collections rather than just living in a digital state. 

    From the difficulties of curation arises the importance of collaboration, especially with multidisciplinary teams. A solution to the epistemological difficulties of reusing qualitative data has been this use of collaborative curation practices (Karcher et al., 2021). This collaboration, along with data management practices and technological advances, allow for more context and ensure ethical sharing of information so that it may be possible to reuse this qualitative information. In 2013, Dr. Alex Poole discussed this future of sharing as well while also reinforcing the need for collaboration and cooperation. This is what Poole cites as the key to long-term sustainability of information. This sustainability allows for longer periods of time to reuse information for its intended purpose. This sustainability is echoed by Dr. Colin Post and Dr. Alexandra Chassanoff. They highlight that keeping tensions between local and professional contexts at the forefront of curation work is necessary for sustaining archival infrastructure long-term (2021). This reflects the need for both trained standardized practices for curation but also the flexibility for the needs of local contexts. Without diverse collaboration, the quality of curated products is questionable and not sustainable.

    Collaboration is not just a solution nor unique to curation, but a vital part of distinguishing this methodology from other information science disciplines. As Sheila Anderson and Dr. Tobias Blanke followed the digital evolution of science disciplines and now the humanities, they iterated the importance of collaboration. They compared the definitions of e-Science and "At their core is the idea of collaboration and sharing between and across communities – whether sharing research data, compute power or other resources– in order to enable new forms of enquiry, and the generation and understanding of new research questions"(Anderson & Blanke, 2012). This identification of collaborative work in e-Science was seen again in all of the examples such as anthropologists and computer scientists collaborating to complete new digital humanities projects. The digital humanities inquiry in itself is based on the collaboration model (Maryl et al., 2020). To promote this methodology  of digital curation, Dr. Natasha Mauthner and Odette Parry focus on the policies that help facilitate researchers to curate their work (2013). They found that some of the most successful attempts to facilitate archives were due to the collaboration of the researcher and some entity that specializes in curation, like an organization, team, or single curator. By working together, this process happens more often and more ethically.

    This distinguishing factor of collaboration is helpful as it highlights the necessity of having multiple perspectives on the same archive or project. Uniting these varying practices and specialties can create new innovative standards to improve the ethics of collection. There is no set practice in the work to follow or even review projects for their ethicalities but there is still the question of the quality of an archive. 
	
    After the completion of curation work, one difficulty derived from the nature of the work is how to measure its success. While other fields may have more obvious ways to measure success, curation lacks specific standards to judge this abstract concept. Abrams attempts to capture this in four categories for evaluating the success of digital preservation (2021). These four categories are accessibility, integrity, authenticity, and usability. This unsurprisingly reflects many of the distinguishing factors of digital curation that have been common in the literature. New ideas articulated in this piece include the concepts of integrity and authenticity. These highlight the responsibilities of the curator(s) to be transparent and construct a trustworthy workflow. This transparency can also help reduce future replication crises (Slingerland et al., 2020) that may occur in many fields. Integrating transparency by documenting an archival workflow can improve the reproducibility and sustainability of archives. Accessibility and usability reflect the use, reuse, and sharing of the work. As this focuses on the experience of the user and quantifying these categories for measuring success, it also summarizes the important characteristics of curation work. 
	
    With these factors in mind, this methodology of digital curation is based on much of the main concerns that arise with mediation. The social responsibility of curators is intertwined with their occupational responsibilities to collect, store, and display quality information that is accessible and usable. Collaboration and awareness of how to ensure the quality of the archive will be important considerations to highlight in the reflexive practices of curation. After parsing through these themes from the literature, these articles will start as a solid foundation for a larger literature review for best practices. Moving towards creation of the archive, it will also be worthwhile to look specifically at projects that have already been created that can model or guide this project's use of technology or tools. These sources will act as guidance for an information architecture analysis as many projects were cited to explain these distinguishing characteristics of curation.


### Research Question

How can the method of digital curation be used to ethically catalog items, especially those connected to global health studies, for use in interdisciplinary education at Allegheny College?

### Project Aims

My project's primary goal is to use digital curation for  ethical, educational, and sustainable preservation of Indonesian bis pole. This will be accomplished by completing several smaller goals before achieving this final construct. 

First, I hope to attain an understanding of the best practices and current tools used for long-term data preservation and digital curation. Second, I hope to create a framework of archival workflow for Allegheny College. This will be focused on ethical displays in public spaces for educational purposes which can be later used for the creation of an installation. 

With the completion of these pieces, this project will catalog this artifact while creating an accessible digital archive connected to the physical item.


### Expected Final Product

The final product of this project will be seen in three parts: a literature review with paired analysis, a digital archive, and a final reflective composition. The literature review will focus on the best practices of curation and act as a guide for the analysis. This will be an information architecture analysis of the website collections mentioned in the literature. This knowledge of practices, technology, and techniques will then be applied as I curate the donated Indonesian bis pole. With the completion of the digital archive,  the final composition will surmise the process and application of hybrid curation while reflecting on the implications of this work in the fields of global health and informatics. The digital archive will be created and ran through GitHub pages which can be accessed publicly on the internet.

### Methods **

Due to the construction of this project, the methods will be uniquely specific to my work to achieve the proposed aims. The project will begin with information gathering seen in the form of a literature review paired with an information architecture analysis. This will be followed by application of this information seen in the creation of an archival workflow and catalog the item. The final  documentation will reflect the process of using these methods, elaborate on ethical considerations, and discuss implications of this work. 

Before being able to conduct any work with the donated item, I will work on collecting current information on the methods of digital curation. The literature review will build on the preliminary one conducted for this proposal. It will focus on the current best practices of digital curation. These pieces will then act as guides for websites and tools to analyze for the information architecture analysis. This will focus on how these digital collections are structured and what techniques or tools are being utilized for their archives.

After gathering this information, I will able to apply the methodology of digital curation to catalog this item. I will work through the steps of collecting and organizing the information into a digital archive. Due to the timeline of this project, I will only be focusing on the digital archive for this item. The technology and digital archives are often seen as a different ways of access and preservation to enrich information past what can be done with only analog methods (Sabharwal, 2021; Sheffer & Hunker, 2019; Siddiqui, 2015).

One of the ways to add meaning to the archive is the ability to reorganize and link data, whose capacities only increase with the digital format. I will be likely displaying this information in a website framework with influence from the technology services discovered in the information architecture analysis. I plan to organize the information by using Global Health dimensions as a starting guide for the subsections such as the power and economic background of these wooden sculptures being art-for-export. This has the flexibility to adjust as I discover what information is available for this piece.

With replication and sustainability in mind, a template or bare framework will likely be created along with the cataloged sculpture to guide future curation work. The creation of this template should allow for quick and relatively easy input of information to create a functional, accessible, and enriching digital archive. My work of adding the additional sections will act as a guide for future curation that can build upon the basic template. Overall, this application of hybrid curation will act as a model for an ethical archival workflow that can be reused or even improved upon with future iterations. This will all be made with the consideration that some curators in the future may not have the same level of technical skills as myself.

Lastly, documentation and reflection are important with this work. After finishing the display, I will need to formalize my notes and experiences of the application process into this reusable and understandable workflow. This will only be feasible for this project if it is integrated into all parts of the project with extra time dedicated towards the conclusion. 

As curators continue to decolonize their practices by adding time for reflexivity (Christen & Anderson, 2019), I will add this time throughout my process but dedicate this last third of my work to reflexivity. The documentation should and will include conversations and thought processes around actively incorporating ethics considering other implications of this work. This work will function with considerations about intermediation (Sabharwal, 2017) which is one of the large conversations occurring amongst curators and other digital humanists. Other considerations such as representation and power will be heavily considered as well as this display is out of the context of the culture and society it is representing and created by curators. 

These ethical considerations lead into how to measure the success of the archive. This construct of success cannot be directly or indirectly observed. Abrams (2021) suggests from their research that we can use the proxies of accessibility, integrity, authenticity, and usability to gauge the success of an archive. This will lead me to interdisciplinary collaboration as we work through these questions of how to successfully use digital tools for a functional final product while conveying the integrity of the archive as I act in the role of curator.

Though I am not an expert in the geographic region, peoples, or material, I am still prepared to complete work for this project. As already mentioned, curators are not often experts anymore of the collections they work with due to the overabundance of information. This workflow will be designed for flexible but more importantly collaborative archiving. Naturally, my dual interdisciplinary majors will facilitate some of this collaboration with plans to include more perspectives on this work. From my coursework and internship opportunities, I have been able to focus on transdisciplinary ethics of data collection, storage, and display. I was able to work an Ethics Technical Leader, specialized in holistic project display and website development. With my humanities focus in global health, I have entered many conversations on ethical practices and their relation to health. This has been especially seen in narrative and data representation as well as discussions on the commodification of cultures. Lastly, this information is collected and organized for the hopes of use in education. My work as an instructional designer and program coordinator for Teach Global Health has prepared me to create this work with consideration of decolonizing practices and transparency in methodology. With all of these in consideration, all of the work I have conducted at Allegheny College has led me to this unique position to complete this project.

### Global Health Context **

Global Health Studies is an interdisciplinary field that can be pedagogically split into four distinct dimensions: science and the environment, power and economics, ethics and social responsibility, and culture and society. My proposed project intersects with these dimensions on many levels. //I will be distinguishing the intersections on the micro-level of my project in respect to the bis pole then move into larger implications of digital curation that connect to global health. ///



*Indonesian Bis Pole*

    Though we are still confirming the origin and story of this wooden art sculpture, we recognize that this item is an Indonesian (likely Asmat) art-for-export bis pole. //
    
    My work will only dive deeper into these connections to then be displayed in the archive created through digital curation.

*Digital Curation*

    //large picture, musuems can not longer escape the dicussion history memory, understanding, and thus health even if the exhibit does not directly relate to health. 

    *Cultural Heritage Preservation*

    Combining these two topics are where my project is adding to the ethics of cultural heritage preservation especially in respect of minimizing harm to the wellbeing of people. 

    Museums have been entering into a larger role of social justice and health //
    exhibits can place a role in activism, empathy, connection and //

    These concepts in mind, our item requires even more care as it reflects minority/indigenous peoples. These groups are often subject to the worst of the colonialist effects of curation. Though my project will not uproot the whole system of oppression, my work will add to the discussion of more ethical curation.


### Proposed Timeline

*Refer to Google Docs: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1mQEpVl6QfEaD3YiRdkefcQTeMpbd5m-P7hO5W5g1ncY/edit?usp=sharing*

### Budget

This project will not require a budget. The texts I am using for my literature review are free and publicly available or accessed through the Allegheny library services. The digital space and software for the digital exhibit are already available under the existing Allegheny digital infrastructure. The potential installation of the gifted item will not be considered as a part of this project.